<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
			<p>Fleurette had walked very fast. She was still tremendously excited and would have run all the way, only that the road for the most part led sharply uphill and that her heart was beating and pumping wildly with agitation.</p>
			<p>Strangely enough the gates of the park were wide open, which was very unusual, as they were always kept closed for fear of the footpads and vagabonds. Old Pierre, who was in charge of the gate, was nowhere to be seen. Fleurette ran along the sanded avenue which, bordered by bosquets of acacia and elder, led in sharp curves up to the house. Twilight was slowly fading into evening, but even through the gathering darkness Fleurette noticed that the avenue, usually so beautifully raked and tidy, was all trampled and knocked about as if by the weight of many heavy feet. A minute later the main block of the château stood out before her, like a solid mass silhouetted against a jade-coloured sky. Just above the pointed roof of the turret at the furthest angle of the façade, a star shone with a cold, silvery radiance.</p>
			<p>The entrance into the main building was under a broad archway which intersected the façade and led into the great farmyard and to the sheds and farm buildings. Fleurette felt vaguely conscious that something unusual had occurred at the château; though the place looked peaceful enough, it appeared strangely deserted, at this hour, when usually men and maids were still about their work. She slipped quickly under the archway, and turning sharply to the left, she came to the great paved hall where servants and farm hands sat at meals.</p>
			<p>She found the place in a strange state of confusion: the men⁠—they were all old men these days, as all the young ones had had to go and join the army and fight the English⁠—the men were standing about in groups, talking and gesticulating with their arms, after the manner of the people of Dauphiné who are glib of speech and free with their gestures; the maids were gathered together in the dark corner of the room, holding their aprons to their eyes. The oil lamp which hung from the whitewashed ceiling had not yet been lit: only one or two tallow-candles on the table guttered in their pewter sconces.</p>
			<p>Old Mathieu, who was the acknowledged father of the staff and who was affectionately called Papa by the maids, was the first to spy Fleurette, who stood disconcerted in the doorway.</p>
			<p>“Ah! Mam’zelle Fleurette! Mam’zelle Fleurette!” he exclaimed and lifted his hands and cast up his eyes with an expression of woe: “<i xml:lang="fr">Quel malheur! Mon Dieu, quel malheur!</i>”</p>
			<p>He had on his bottle-green coat, his buckled shoes, and the white cotton gloves which he wore when he served the family at meals upstairs. They had just finished dinner, it seems, when the awful calamity occurred.</p>
			<p>“But what is it, papa?” Fleurette asked, feeling quite ready to cry in sympathy. “What has happened?”</p>
			<p>“The soldiers, mam’zelle!” papa replied, and a fresh groan went the round of men and women alike, and one or two of the girls sobbed aloud.</p>
			<p>Now as far as Fleurette was concerned, as recently as this very morning, the inner meaning of these words “the soldiers!” would not perhaps have had much significance. In her own little home, by Bibi’s strict orders, politics and social questions were never discussed. Fleurette was not supposed to know anything of the conflicts that were raging in the great cities, in the name of liberty and of fraternity. The horrors of summary arrests, of perquisitions, of sentences without trial, of wholesale executions, of hatred and revenge and lust were supposed to be beyond her ken; and knowing Bibi’s abhorrence of those subjects being broached, she kept her counsels and her knowledge to herself. But Fleurette was not brainless, and she had a large heart. With her brain she had noted many things which were wilfully kept away from her, and her kind heart had often been filled with pity at many of the tales which she had heard in the village, tales of suffering under this new kind of tyranny, wielded, it seems, in the name of liberty and of the brotherhood of man. She had heard many things and had forgotten nothing; but somehow until this morning these things had seemed remote, like the tales of ogres and demons which are told to frighten children. She had not disbelieved them, but vaguely she felt that nothing of the sort could possibly happen to people whom she knew and loved.</p>
			<p>But since this morning many things had occurred which had widened her range of vision. Amédé, who did not want to go away, was being dragged from home in order to be made into a soldier and to fight the English. She had actually seen some of those soldiers, ragged, uncouth and unkempt, with their officer, like a great bully, speaking to her, as if she were a mere slut out of the streets. He had jeered when she told him that she was Citizen Armand’s daughter, and the soldiers had nudged one another and seemed to mock her when she met their glance. Then again she had heard mysterious voices and seen something in the person of a decrepit old faggot-carrier that had thrilled and puzzled her. All these things had worked a subtle change in Fleurette. The tales of ogres and demons no longer appeared quite so remote. The fact that there were evil and sorrow in the world had in a vague kind of way been brought home to her, and also that the spectre of death and misery of which she had only heard was actually lurking in this peaceful corner of Dauphiné and had already knocked at this very door.</p>
			<p>“The soldiers!” meant something to her now.</p>
			<p>“What happened?” she asked, and a dozen tongues were ready to embark on the telling of the tragic event. It was just after dinner. Madame and Mademoiselle had retired to the boudoir, as usual, and Monsieur was sipping his wine in the dining-room, when the great bell at the gate clanged loudly. Pierre, who was still at work in the stables, ran to open the gate: he was almost knocked down by two men on horseback who, without a word or question rode past him along the avenue up to the house followed by a dozen men or more in tattered uniforms and wearing dirty red caps on their heads. The sound of horses and of men stamping the ground brought some of the maids and farmhands out into the yard. The soldiers had come to a halt under the archway, the two riders then dismounted and ordered André to take their horses round to the stables. André, of course, did not dare disobey. Then, as the entrance door was closed, one of the soldiers knocked loudly against it with the butt-end of his musket, whilst one of those who had been on horseback and who appeared to be in authority called out summarily:</p>
			<p>“Open in the name of the Republic!”</p>
			<p>Old Mathieu, who was upstairs clearing away the dinner things, terribly scared, ran down to open the door. Again without a word or question, the soldiers pushed past him until they came to the vestibule where they demanded to know where were the ci-devant Frontenacs. Old Mathieu here paused in his narrative and once more threw up his hands and cast up his eyes in horror.</p>
			<p>“Ci-devant, Mam’zelle!” he exclaimed. “I ask you! Just as those devils up in Paris talked of our poor martyred King and Queen!”</p>
			<p>Of course he tried to stop the brigands from going up to see Madame like that, in their dusty shoes and dirty clothes. But what could he do alone among so many? Ah! if only Baptiste and Jean, Achille and Henri had been there, as in the good old days, fine sturdy fellows of the Dauphiné: they would soon have got the better of these down-at-heel bandits, and if it was a case of protecting Madame and Mademoiselle, why! there would have been some broken heads, and the soldiers of the Republic would have sung another song than they were singing now⁠—the muckworms! But there! Henri and André and the lot of the young ones had all been taken for cannon-fodder, to fight against the English, and there were only a few fogies left now like he⁠—Mathieu⁠—and the women.</p>
			<p>Anyway, poor old papa was helpless. All he could do was to precede those hellhounds upstairs, so that he might at least warn Monsieur of what was coming. But even this they would not let him do; as soon as he had reached the upstairs landing, the same man who had ordered him to open the front door in the name of the Republic, and who wore a tricolour sash round his middle, this same man grabbed him by the shoulder and thrust him aside as if he were a bundle of faggots. And without more ado, he just walked into the dining-room where Monsieur was still quietly sipping his last glass of wine.</p>
			<p>From seeing Monsieur sitting there, the beautiful long-stemmed wineglass in his hand, his face quite serene, you would have thought that he had heard nothing of the turmoil on the stairs. But he had heard everything, the tramping of feet, the rough voices, the curt command to open in the name of the Republic. He knew what was coming. Perhaps he had expected it long ago. It was well to be prepared for anything these days. Anyway, there he sat, glass in hand, his elbow resting on the table, where Mathieu had but a few minutes ago been engaged in clearing away the dessert. At the rude entry made by all those ragamuffins into his beautifully ordered dining-room, he just turned his head and looked at the men.</p>
			<p>“In the name of the Republic,” the man with the sash said curtly.</p>
			<p>Monsieur put his glass down and rose slowly to his feet:</p>
			<p>“What is it you want?” he asked quietly.</p>
			<p>“The rest of the family, first of all,” the man with the sash replied. “I want you all here together.”</p>
			<p>“Madame de Frontenac and my daughter Rose are not at home,” said Monsieur, still speaking very quietly.</p>
			<p>“That’s a lie,” the other retorted. “They were at meal here with you.”</p>
			<p>And with careless finger he pointed to the serviettes and plates which still littered the table. Monsieur did not wince under the insult; nor was the saying of such a brigand an insult to so high-minded a gentleman as Monsieur. All he said was:</p>
			<p>“That is so. Madame and Mile de Frontenac were at dinner with me, until half an hour ago when they left the house together.”</p>
			<p>“Whither did they go?”</p>
			<p>“That I do not know.”</p>
			<p>“Which is another lie.”</p>
			<p>“If I did know,” Monsieur rejoined imperturbably, “I would not tell you.”</p>
			<p>“We’ll soon see about that,” the man with the sash said grimly. He then turned to the soldier who appeared to be in command over the others: “Allons! citizen lieutenant,” he said curtly, “the rest is your business. The two women have got to be found. That is the first thing, after that we shall see.”</p>
			<p>The officer then ordered two of his men to stand on guard over Monsieur, and since then the tramp, tramp of the soldiers’ feet had resounded throughout the château. Upstairs they went, and downstairs; in Madame’s room and in Mademoiselle’s, in the kitchen, the stables, the offices. They interrogated the men, they bullied the women; they turned everything topsy-turvy; they raked about in the hay and the straw of the stables, they scoured the park, they glued their ugly, dirty noses to the sanded paths, to try and find the imprint of footsteps. But neither of Madame or of Mademoiselle had they yet found a trace. They were still at it, raking and scouring and searching. In the intervals they tried to browbeat Monsieur, threatening him with summary shooting one moment, which only made him laugh and shrug his shoulders, and promising him immunity for his women-folk if he would say where they could be found. But these promises only made Monsieur laugh and again shrug his shoulders.</p>
			<p>“Immunity?” he said. “They have that already, thank God! for they are beyond your reach now. If they were not, do you think I would trust to your promises?”</p>
			<p>Old Mathieu paused. The story had neared its end:⁠—this tale of woe and anxiety and horror, such as the worthy old man had never thought to see. The others had not much to say; the maids were still crying, with excitement rather than with grief, and the old men had stared open-mouthed, or sagely nodded their heads.</p>
			<p>“Then,” Fleurette put in at last, “Madame and Mademoiselle have gone. Really⁠—really gone?”</p>
			<p>Mathieu nodded with another sigh, half of perplexity, half of woe.</p>
			<p>“But whither?” Fleurette insisted. “How? Why?”</p>
			<p>“God alone knows, Mam’zelle,” papa averred. “He has spirited Madame and Mademoiselle away to save them from these brigands.”</p>
			<p>“Did anybody see them go?”</p>
			<p>Men and maids shook their heads. No one had seen Madame or Mademoiselle go. Old Mathieu was the last to have seen the ladies. He had just begun to clear the table, when they rose, and, as was their custom, went through to the boudoir. Mathieu had opened the door for them. And now he came to think of it, the ladies had each kissed Monsieur very tenderly before they went out of the room. Yes! the kiss had seemed like a farewell. Mathieu shook his head dolefully: he remembered it now, but hadn’t thought anything about it at the moment. Monsieur certainly appeared more thoughtful. Usually, while he drank his last glass of wine and Mathieu was engaged in washing the silver in the large copper bowl which he always brought into the room for that purpose, Monsieur would chat with him, talk over the gossip of the day. But tonight he had been unusually silent. Yes! Mathieu now remembered quite distinctly about the kiss, and about Monsieur being so silent. But he certainly had noticed nothing else unusual, until the moment when those brigands banged at the door and demanded admittance in the name of their godless Republic.</p>
			<p>Mathieu was on the stairs at that moment, so he did not know how Monsieur had looked when he heard all the tramping and the noise. But Madame and Mademoiselle were gone, of that there could be no doubt. The brigands had searched for them, like so many dogs digging for a bone, and not a trace was there of the two ladies, for the bon Dieu, no doubt, had made them invisible.</p>
			<p>Of old Mathieu and the staff, the officer in command took no notice, after he had summarily ordered them to muster up in the hall; he counted up the indoor-servants and the farmhands; those who had their homes outside the precincts of the château, he ordered roughly out of the place.</p>
			<p>“Get back to your homes!” he had said to them, after he had inspected and questioned them; “and stay there quietly, if you value your lives.”</p>
			<p>So there were only half a dozen old men, the four girls and the staff’s cook left in the château. All of them were scared, and as Mam’zelle Fleurette could see, they just stood about and talked and talked while the girls did nothing but cry. He⁠—Mathieu⁠—could do nothing with any of them. The work of the house ought to be carried on; none of them had had any supper yet. But there! young and old, they were, all of them, too much upset to work or to eat; and the tramp-tramp-tramp, upstairs and downstairs was nerve-shattering to everybody.</p>
			<p>Fleurette listened to the amazing story until the end. As Mathieu said, there was the ceaseless tramping of feet still going on. They⁠—those horrible soldiers of the Republic, unworthy to be called Frenchmen⁠—were still searching for Madame and Mademoiselle in order to drag them to Orange where the awful guillotine had been at work these months past; or perhaps even to Paris⁠—that den of horrors beside which the stories of demons and ogres were but trivial tales.</p>
			<p>Madame and Mademoiselle! who never in their lives had done any harm to anyone: but rather spent every hour of the day planning and executing kind deeds! And Mademoiselle! so delicate and frail that even her father, who idolized her, hardly dared touch her. And now these men, these rough and uncouth soldiers, with their harsh voices and bullying ways, to think of their approaching Mademoiselle, pushing her, dragging her, it made Fleurette’s blood boil even to think of such a possibility. No wonder that the bon Dieu had made them invisible to the eyes of all those bandits.</p>
			<p>Tramp! tramp! tramp! and now a loud banging as if pieces of furniture, chairs, tables were being overturned, and then a crash, as of broken china!</p>
			<p>“Holy Virgin!” Papa Mathieu exclaimed with a loud groan; “to think of Madame’s beautiful things! Those brigands are furious at not finding Madame and Mademoiselle, and are venting their wrath on inanimate things.”</p>
			<p>It was these words of old Mathieu that sent Fleurette’s thoughts flying in another direction⁠—back to the early afternoon of this memorable day⁠—back to the first visit of these awful soldiers, and to the faggot-carrier with his bundle tied up in sacking. From thence to the voice! The mysterious voice that had told her where valuables and papers were to be found. It was such a flash of recollection that her whole face became transfigured; anxiety and superstitious awe gave place to that same fervour which had animated her when she met the eyes of the faggot-carrier: eyes that conveyed a message, which at last she was beginning to understand.</p>
			<p>“Papa!” she cried impulsively.</p>
			<p>“Yes, Mam’zelle?” Mathieu asked with another sigh.</p>
			<p>“Did anything else happen?⁠—I mean anything unusual?⁠—Did Madame⁠—or Monsieur⁠—receive a letter? a message? or⁠—or did any other stranger come to the château this afternoon?”</p>
			<p>“Oh think, Papa Mathieu, think,” she implored with tears of agitation choking her voice. “I cannot tell you how important it is. Try to remember⁠—was there anything?⁠—anybody?⁠—”</p>
			<p>Papa persistently shook his head, until Pierre, who was the gatekeeper, reminded him that Monsieur had gone down the avenue as far as the gate, just ten minutes before dinner was served.</p>
			<p>“There’s nothing very unusual in that,” Mathieu retorted. “Monsieur is often out just before dinner is served.”</p>
			<p>“Yes!” Pierre insisted. “But what did he do this evening? He walked straight to the gate, which I had closed half an hour before. I saw him. He walked straight to the gate, he did, and you know the old acacia tree just the other side? Well! Monsieur put his foot on a bar of the gate and reached over to the forked branch of the old tree. I saw him quite plainly, I tell you. And when he walked back to the house he had a piece of paper in his hand with some writing on it, which he was reading. And I think, papa,” Pierre concluded triumphantly, “you’ll have to admit that there was something unusual in that.”</p>
			<p>But Mathieu, with the obstinacy of old age and long service, would not admit it, even now.</p>
			<p>“Monsieur,” he said, “met the mail-carrier at the gate, he often comes at this hour. He gave Monsieur a letter. Monsieur often gets letters⁠—”</p>
			<p>But here André interposed. Old André⁠—they were all of them old⁠—worked in the stables, and it was he who had taken the two horses from the soldiers when ordered to do so, and walked them round to the stables. It was then that he noticed two beggars hanging about in the yard: a man and a woman. He had peremptorily ordered them off the premises.</p>
			<p>“Beggars!” Fleurette exclaimed eagerly. “What were they like?”</p>
			<p>André said that as the sun was in his eyes he couldn’t see them very well. There was a man and a woman. He was busy with the horses and upset by the arrival of all these brigands. The woman he couldn’t see at all because of the shawl which covered her head, but he recollected that the man was a big fellow, bent nearly double under a huge bundle tied up in sacking.</p>
			<p>“When I spoke to him,” André went on, “he mumbled something or other, but I just told him to clear out, he and his woman; we’d enough of vagabonds, I said, in the place with all these soldiers.”</p>
			<p>“And did he go?” Fleurette asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes. I must admit that he went off quite quietly after that. I did not think he meant any evil, because when he first caught sight of me he did not attempt to hide or to run away.”</p>
			<p>“If he had,” André went on after a moment or two, “I would have been after him pretty quickly, and wanted to know what was in that big bundle.”</p>
			<p>He paused, a look of perplexity and of shamefacedness came over his wrinkled old face while he thoughtfully scratched his head: “Now I think of it,” he said, “I ought to have inspected that bundle. It looked mighty heavy for faggots or for rags. Perhaps he had been up to no good after all⁠—And directly after I lost sight of him and his woman I saw a whole lot of faggots lying in a heap close by the stable door.”</p>
			<p>The other old men and the maids had gathered closer round André and Fleurette. This was the first they had heard of the old vagabond and his woman, and the bundle which appeared so heavy.</p>
			<p>“You certainly ought to have inspected that bundle, André,” Mathieu said sententiously. He felt that there was a chance of recapturing his dignity which seemed to have been slightly impaired through his argument with Pierre. He could reassert his authority at any rate by rebuking André. “It looks,” he went on, “as if the old vagabond had brought a lot of faggots with him, then turned them out of the sacking and replaced them by God knows what valuables he may have stolen.”</p>
			<p>“I was so upset, you understand, papa!” André murmured ruefully.</p>
			<p>“We were all of us upset, as you call it, André,” papa rebuked sternly, “but that is no excuse for neglect of duty.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t scold André, papa,” Fleurette broke in excitedly. “My belief is that the old vagabond, as you call him, was a messenger from the Holy Virgin, sent on purpose to get Madame and Mademoiselle safely out of the way.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Mam’zelle!”</p>
			<p>“From the Holy Virgin!”</p>
			<p>“Sainte Marie, mere de Dieu, priez pour nous!” came in chorus from the maids. Even the cook, an elderly woman, jealous of her own dignity, was unable to conceal her excitement. The old men shook their heads, looked wise and sceptical.</p>
			<p>“What makes you say that, Mam’zelle Fleurette?” Mathieu asked in an awed whisper.</p>
			<p>But Fleurette was silent now. Already she had repented of having said so much. Discretion would have been so much wiser. That was the worst of her: she always allowed her tongue to run away with her. She looked eagerly from one anxious face to the other: well she knew that the little she had said would be talked over and commented on and be made the subject of gossip until it reached the village and possibly even Serres and Sisteron; and God only knew what harm this might do to Madame and Mademoiselle. She bit the tip of her tongue hard just to punish it for having wagged too freely, and seized with a sudden impulse, which she found irresistible, she snatched up a candle from the table, and incontinently turned and fled out of the hall, leaving the others to gape and stare after her, to scratch their heads, and to conjecture.</p>
			<p>Aye! and to gossip too.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
