<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p>The perambulating army had now gone to rest: some in the cart-shed, some along the benches and tables or floor of the inn. The lieutenant in a bed. Is he not the officer commanding this score of ardent patriots? Therefore must he lie in a bed⁠—old Portal’s bed⁠—whilst old Portal himself and his wife, older and more decrepit than he, can lie on the floor, or in the dog’s kennel for aught Lieutenant Godet cares.</p>
			<p>The two woodcutters⁠—or shall we call them charcoal-burners?⁠—were among the last to leave. They had petitioned for work among the worthies here present: but money was very scarce these days and each man did what work he could for himself, and did not pay another to do it for him. But Papa Tronchet, who was a carpenter by trade and owned a little bit of woodland just by the bridge, close to Armand’s cottage, he promised one of the men⁠—not both⁠—a couple of hours’ work tomorrow: wood-cutting at the rate of two sous an hour, and then he thought it dear.</p>
			<p>And so the company had dispersed: each man to his home. The two vagabonds⁠—woodcutters or charcoal-burners, they were anyhow vagabonds⁠—found their way into the town. Wearily they trudged, for one of them was very old and the other lame, till they reached a narrow lane at right angles to the riverbank. The lane was made up of stone houses that had overhanging eaves, between which the sun could never penetrate. It was invariably either as damp as the bottom of a well, or as dry and windswept as an iron stovepipe. Tonight it was dry and hot: broken-down shutters, innocent of paint, creaked upon rusty hinges. A smell of boiled cabbage, of stale water and garlic hung beneath the eaves; it came in great gusts down pitch-dark stairways, under narrow doors, oozing with sticky moisture.</p>
			<p>The two vagabonds turned into one of these doors and by instinct seemingly, for it was pitch dark, they mounted the stone stairs that squelched with grease and dirt underneath their feet. They did not speak a word until they came to the top of the house, when one of them with a kick of his boot threw open a door; it groaned and creaked under the blow. It gave on an attic-room with sloping ceiling, black with the dirt of ages, and with dormer window masked by a tattered rag that had once been a curtain. There was a wooden table in the centre of the room, and three chairs, with broken backs and ragged rush-seats, dotted about. On the table a couple of tallow candles guttered in pewter sconces.</p>
			<p>One of the chairs was drawn close up to the table and on it sat a young man dressed in a well-worn travelling-coat with heavy boots on his feet, and a shabby tricorne hat on the top of his head. His arms were stretched out over the table and his face was buried in them. He had obviously been asleep when the door was so unceremoniously thrown open. At the sound he raised his head and blinked drowsily in the dim light at the newcomers.</p>
			<p>Then he stretched out his arms, yawned and gave himself a shake like a sleepy dog, and finally exclaimed in English! “Ah! at last!”</p>
			<p>One of the vagabonds⁠—the one namely who at Les Amandiers had appeared with bent shoulders and a hacking cough, now straightened out what proved to be a magnificent athletic figure, and gave a pleasant laugh.</p>
			<p>“Tony, you lazy dog!” he said, “I’ve a mind to throw you downstairs. What say you, Ffoulkes? While you and I have been breaking our backs and poisoning our lungs with the scent of garlic, I verily believe that this villain Tony has been fast asleep.”</p>
			<p>“By all means let’s throw him downstairs,” assented the second vagabond, now no longer lame, whom his friend had addressed as Ffoulkes.</p>
			<p>“What would you have me do but sleep?” Tony broke in with a laugh. “I was told to wait, and so I waited. I’d far rather have been with you.”</p>
			<p>“No, you wouldn’t,” Ffoulkes demurred, “for then you would have been dirtier than I, and almost as filthy as Blakeney. Look at him; did you ever see such a disgusting object?”</p>
			<p>“By Gad!” rejoined Blakeney, surveying his own slender hands coated with coal-dust, grease and grime, “I don’t know when I have been quite so dirty. Soap and water!” he commanded with a lofty gesture, “or I perish.”</p>
			<p>But Tony gave a rueful shrug.</p>
			<p>“I have a bit of soap in my pocket,” he said, and diving into the capacious pocket of his coat he produced an infinitesimal remnant of soap which he threw upon the table. “As for water, I can’t offer you any. The only tap in the house is in the back kitchen which Madame, our worthy landlady, has locked up for the night. She won’t have anything wasted, she tells me, not even water.”</p>
			<p>“Fine, thrifty people, your Dauphinois,” commented Blakeney, wisely shaking his head. “But did you try bribery?”</p>
			<p>“Yes! But Madame⁠—I beg your pardon, Citizeness Martot⁠—immediately called me a cursed aristo, and threatened me with some committee or other. I couldn’t argue with her, she reeked of garlic.”</p>
			<p>“And you, Tony, are an arrant coward,” Blakeney rejoined, “where garlic is concerned.”</p>
			<p>“I am,” Tony was willing to admit. “That’s why I am so terrified of you both at this moment.”</p>
			<p>They all laughed, and since water was not obtainable, Sir Percy Blakeney, one of the most exquisite dandies of his time, and his friend Sir Andrew Ffoulkes, sat down on rickety chairs, in clothes sticky with dirt, their faces and hands masked by a thick coating of grime. Down the four walls of the small attic-room fillets of greasy moisture trickled and mingled with the filth that lay in cakes upon the floor.</p>
			<p>“I can’t bear to look at Tony,” Blakeney said with a mock sigh, “he is too demned clean.”</p>
			<p>“We’ll soon remedy that,” was Ffoulkes’s dry comment.</p>
			<p>And behold Sir Andrew Ffoulkes at close grips with Lord Anthony Dewhurst, and this in silence for fear of disturbing the rest of the house, and bringing attention on themselves. It was a sparring match in the best style, Blakeney acting as referee, its object⁠—to transfer some of the grime that coated the clothes and hands of Sir Andrew on to the immaculate Lord Tony. They were only boys after all, these men, who even now were risking their lives in order to rescue the innocent from the clutches of a bloody tyranny. They were boys in their love of adventure, and in their hero worship, and men in the lighthearted way in which they were prepared for the supreme sacrifice, should luck turn against them.</p>
			<p>The sparring match ended in a call for mercy on the part of Lord Tony. His face was plastered with grime, his hands as dirty as those of his friends.</p>
			<p>“Tony,” Blakeney said finally, when he called a halt, “if her ladyship were to see you now, she would divorce you.”</p>
			<p>Vent having been given to unconquerable animal spirits, there was a quick return to the serious business of the day.</p>
			<p>“What is the latest?” Lord Tony asked.</p>
			<p>“Just this,” Sir Percy replied: “That those hellhounds have sent out detachments of soldiers all over the country to ferret out what they are pleased to call treason. We all know what that means. Since their iniquitous ‘Law of the Suspect,’ no man, woman or child is safe from denunciation: now with this perambulating army, summary arrests occur by the thousand. It seems that at any moment any of those brigands can seize you by the coat-collar and drag you before one of their precious committees, who promptly sends you to the nearest guillotine.”</p>
			<p>“And you came across a detachment of those brigands, I suppose.”</p>
			<p>“We have; Ffoulkes and I spent a couple of hours in their company, in the midst of fumes of garlic that would have reduced you, Tony, to a drivelling coward. I vow the smell of it has even infested my hair.”</p>
			<p>“Anything to be done?” Tony asked simply. He knew his chief well enough to perceive the vein of grim earnestness through all this flippancy.</p>
			<p>“Yes!” Blakeney replied. “The squad of brigands who are scouring this part of France are principally after a family named Frontenac, which consists of father, mother and an invalid daughter. I had already found out something about them in the course of the day, whilst I carted some manure for a farmer close by. Beastly stuff, manure, by the way! I tried to get into touch with Monsieur, who is a stubborn optimist, and does not believe that any man could mean harm to him or to his family. I went to him in the guise of a royalist agent, supposed to have inside information of impending arrests. He simply refused to believe me. Well! we’ve met that type of man before. He will have a terrible awakening tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>Sir Percy paused for a moment or two, a deep frown between his brows. His keen intellect, alive to all those swift tragedies which he had devoted his life to countermine, was already at work envisaging the immediate future, the personages of the coming drama, husband, wife, invalid daughter; then the perquisition, the arrest, summary condemnation and slaughter of three helpless innocents.</p>
			<p>“I can’t help being sorry for the man,” he said after awhile, “though he is an obstinate fool! but it is the wife and daughter whom we cannot allow those savage beasts to capture and to kill. I caught sight of them. The girl is pathetic, frail and crippled. I couldn’t bear⁠—”</p>
			<p>He broke off abruptly. No need to say more, of course; they understood one another these men who had braved death so often together for love of humanity and for love of sport. Blakeney silent, one firm, slender hand clutched upon the table, was working out a problem of how to rescue three helpless people from that certain deathtrap which was already laid for them. The other two waited in equal silence for orders. The League of the Scarlet Pimpernel! pledged to help the innocent and to save the helpless! One to command, nineteen to obey: the two who were here in this filthy, dark attic-room were the chief’s most trusted officers; but the others were not far away!</p>
			<p>Seventeen others! scattered about the countryside, disguised, doing menial work in order to keep in touch with the population, spying, hiding in woods or huts; all of them under orders from their chiefs, and prepared for the call from him.</p>
			<p>“Tony,” Blakeney said at last, “you’d better find Hastings and Stowmaries at once and they must pass the word round to the others. I want three of them⁠—they can draw lots for that⁠—to go to the Four Oaks and there to remain until I can send Ffoulkes to them with full instructions. When you’ve done that, I want you and Ffoulkes to spend the night in and about Les Amandiers, and gather what you can of the projects of those brigands by keeping your ears open. I’ll keep in touch with you from time to time.”</p>
			<p>“You think,” Ffoulkes put in, “that we’ll have trouble with the Frontenacs?”</p>
			<p>“Not with the ladies, of course,” Blakeney replied. “We’ll get them safely out of the way before the perambulating army of jackals arrives. With God’s help we ought to have time enough to gather a few valuables together. The trouble will be with that obstinate, tiresome man. I feel sure he won’t move until the soldiers are hammering at his door. Anyway I shall know my way in and about the château by tomorrow morning, and will then get into touch with you both at Les Amandiers.”</p>
			<p>He rose: a tall, straight figure on whom the filthy clothes of a vagabond woodcutter sat with strange incongruity. But even in this strange garb which was grotesque as well as degrading, there was an extraordinary dignity in the carriage of the head, the broad shoulders, the firm, long Anglo-Saxon limbs, but above all in the flash of the eyes beneath their heavy lids and in the quiet, low-toned voice so obviously accustomed to be heard and obeyed. The two others were ready on the instant to act according to instructions; to act without argument or question. The fire of excitement was in their eyes: the spirit of adventure, of sport for sport’s sake had them in its grip.</p>
			<p>“Do I go with you now, Blakeney?” Ffoulkes asked, as his chief had remained for a moment standing, as if following a train of thought.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Blakeney replied. “And by the way, Ffoulkes, and you too, Tony, while you are at Les Amandiers try and find out about this girl Fleurette the old innkeeper spoke about. He said that the girl would cry her eyes out if anything happened to the Frontenacs. You remember?”</p>
			<p>“I do. He also said that she was as pretty a wench as could be found in Dauphiné,” Ffoulkes put in with a smile.</p>
			<p>“Her father is named Armand,” Blakeney rejoined.</p>
			<p>“And the lieutenant called him a tiger, rather enigmatically I thought.”</p>
			<p>“This Fleurette sounds an engaging young person,” Lord Tony commented with a smile.</p>
			<p>“And should be a useful one in our adventure,” Blakeney concluded. “Find out what you can about her.”</p>
			<p>He was the last to leave the room. Ffoulkes and Lord Tony had already gone down the stone staircase, feeling their way through the darkness. But Sir Percy Blakeney stood for a minute or two longer, erect, silent, motionless. Not Sir Percy Blakeney, that is, the elegant courtier, the fastidious fop, the spoilt child of London society, but the daring adventurer, ready now as so often before, to throw his life in the balance to save three innocent people from death. Would he succeed? Nay! that he did not doubt. Not for a moment. He would save the Frontenacs as he had saved scores of helpless men, women and children before, or leave his bones to moulder in this fair land where his name had become anathema to the tigers that fed on the blood of their kindred. The true adventurer! Reckless of risks and dangers, with only the one goal in view: Success.</p>
			<p>Sport? Of course it was sport! grand, glorious, maddening sport! Sport that made him forget every other joy in life, every comfort, every beatitude. Everything except the exquisite wife who in far-off England waited patiently, with deadly anxiety gnawing at her heart, for news of the man she worshipped. She, perhaps, the greatest heroine of them all.</p>
			<p>With a quick sigh, half of impatience, half of longing, Sir Percy Blakeney finally blew out the tallow-lights and made his way out into the open.</p>
			<p>
				<br/>
				<br/>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>
				<a id="chap03"/>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
