<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
			<p>The soldiers of the Republic together with their officer had spent half the night at Laragne in the tavern kept by the Père Gramme, drinking and jesting with the drabs of the village. Each man had a tale to tell of his own prowess at the château, and how but for him, the ci-devant Frontenac would have slipped through the fingers of justice as readily as the two women had done.</p>
			<p>They were very proud of their prisoner, who sat lonely and silent in a corner of the low-raftered room, foul with the odour of sour wine and perspiring humanity. Monsieur de Frontenac⁠—the ci-devant as he was curtly termed⁠—was apparently taking his misfortune calmly; neither threats nor vain promises caused him to depart from his attitude of quiet philosophy. The soldiers had, of course, made up their minds that he knew well enough where his wife and daughter were in hiding, but they had also realized by now that it was not in their power to force him to divulge what he knew.</p>
			<p>The lieutenant⁠—a man who had begun life as a notary’s clerk, and therefore had some education⁠—was content to shrug his shoulders and to declare that the citizens of the nearest Committee of Public Safety, had plenty of means at their disposal for making an obdurate prisoner speak. He recalled that at the trial of the Widow Capet she had been forced into admissions which, before that, she would sooner have died than make. Mocking glances, jeers and insults were thereupon cast on the prisoner who remained as unconcerned, as serene as before.</p>
			<p>The lieutenant had commandeered billets for his men in the better houses of the village, and just before midnight the party broke up. The prisoner was then conducted to the small, local poste de gendarmerie and there incarcerated in the cell usually occupied by vagabonds and cattle-thieves. Two or three of the soldiers remained at the poste to reinforce the local gendarmes, in case some hot-heads in the village meditated a coup to wrest the traitor Frontenac from the clutches of justice. The lieutenant himself had selected the house of Citizen Colombe the grocer of the Rue Haute for his night-quarters? To say that the worthy épicier did not accord this representative of his country’s army a warm welcome, would be to put it mildly. He was furious, and showed it as plainly as he dared; but there is in every French peasant a sound vein of common sense, and he knows⁠—none better⁠—when submission to the ruling powers is not only the best policy, but at the same time the most conducive to the preservation of his own dignity.</p>
			<p>Ma’ame Colombe⁠—or rather the citizeness⁠—made the lieutenant comfortable and that was all; but at the bottom of her heart she felt that she must do unto him as she would wish her own son to be done by presently, when he too was a soldier in that army which she detested. She fell asleep thinking of Amédé tramping the high-road as these men had done, stockingless, hatless, with unwashed shirt and a dirty worsted cap on his head; and she dreamed all night of him, deprived even of his weekly bath in the big tub, over in the wash-house. That is what she objected to mostly in these men: the dirt. It was wonderful, of course, their fighting for their country, now that all the other countries in the world were attacking France, but Ma’ame Colombe argued to herself that patriotism might just as well be allied to cleanliness. Even the lieutenant, who was after all an officer, and should be setting a good example to his men, would have looked much more imposing if he had washed his face and taken the dust of the road out of his hair.</p>
			<p>Great, therefore, was Ma’ame Colombe’s astonishment the next morning when she, along with several of her friends, being at the market, saw another detachment of soldiers marching into Laragne from the direction of Sisteron. Only eight of them there were, with one officer and a wagon drawn by two splendid horses; but nom du ciel! what a different set of men and horses these were. The men clean as new pins, magnificently dressed in blue coats with white facings and belts, white breeches⁠—all spotless⁠—and black gaiters that reached midway up their thighs. Beneath their elegant chapeau-bras, each adorned with a silk tricolour cockade, they wore their own hair, down to their shoulders, unfettered by the old, ridiculous queue, and each man had successfully cultivated a fierce and magnificent moustache. Everything about them glistened with cleanliness, their boots, their buckles, their muskets; as for the officer, never in all their lives had the good ladies of Laragne seen anyone so magnificent: tall, blond, with a moustache that he could easily have tucked behind his ears, and a little tuft of blond beard at the tip of his chin, he walked with drawn sword at the head of his squad, a superb tricolour sash further enhancing the glory of his attire.</p>
			<p>Potatoes and eggs and butter were forgotten, while market women and customers stood gaping, open mouthed. Never had such beautiful specimens of manhood been seen in Laragne. By the time they reached the Rue Haute all the village had turned out to have a look at them, and heads appeared at every cottage window. The village urchins followed the little squad, intoning the “Marseillaise” and giving vent to their excitement by performing miracles of acrobatic evolutions. Even Ma’ame Colombe, who was at the moment selecting a piece of meat for Sunday’s dinner, could not help but say to herself that she would not mind Amédé being in the army if he was going to look like that!</p>
			<p>At that very moment one of the urchins paused in the midst of a magnificently sketched somersault in order to run down the street and back to the market-place, shouting excitedly:</p>
			<p>“Ma’ame Colombe! Ma’ame Colombe! the soldiers are at the épicerie.”</p>
			<p>And so they were! Ma’ame Colombe, hastily straightened her cap and snatching up her market basket, ran to the corner of the Rue Haute just in time to see the soldiers with their officer and wagon come to a halt outside her front door. The worthy Hector with his son Amédé, and the old man who helped in the shop, were busy taking down the shutters and displaying the sacks of various kinds of haricots and lentils in tempting array all along the shop front. Ma’ame Colombe heard the magnificent officer give a quick order: “Halte!” and “Attention!” and the next moment she saw him enter the shop followed by his men, the wagon remaining drawn up a little further down the street. The urchins and gaffers crowded round the doorstep open-mouthed, and Ma’ame Colombe had some difficulty in pushing her way through into her own house.</p>
			<p>The officer began by asking Hector Colombe how many soldiers of the Republic were still sleeping under his roof.</p>
			<p>“Only the lieutenant and two men, M’sieu’ l’officier,” Hector replied. Whereupon the officer broke in curtly:</p>
			<p>“Call me citizen captain. This is the army of the Revolution and its soldiers are not aristos meseems.”</p>
			<p>Which remark boded no good to Ma’ame Colombe’s ears. Clean or dirty they all appeared to be the same type of brigands; overbearing, exacting and merciless! Ah that poor dear Amédé!</p>
			<p>The officer then demanded to see the lieutenant and the two soldiers. Amédé offered to call them, but was stopped by a brief command from the captain:</p>
			<p>“No, not you,” he said curtly, “I want you here, the citizeness can go.”</p>
			<p>Ma’ame Colombe, obedient and vaguely frightened, put down her basket and went upstairs to fetch the lieutenant and the two men, who were still in bed. But although she had only been gone a couple of minutes, her sense of fear took on a more tangible form when she came down again, for she found all the drawers of the counter open, and much of their contents scattered about the floor. Some of the soldiers were busy ferreting about, behind and under the counter. The officer stood in the middle of the shop talking with Hector, who looked both choleric and sullen; in the doorway, the crowd of gaffers were being kept back by two of the soldiers, who were using the butts of their muskets when some venturesome urchin tried to cross the threshold. But what filled poor Ma’ame Colombe’s heart with dismay was the sight of Amédé sitting in the parlour behind the shop, with two other soldiers obviously on guard over him.</p>
			<p>Her instinct prompted her to run first of all to her husband with a quick whispered: “Hector, what does this mean?”</p>
			<p>But the magnificent officer brusquely thrust himself between her and Hector and said gruffly: “It means, citizeness, that not only treason, but also theft has been traced to this house, and that it is lucky for you that news of it reached the Committee of Sisteron in time, else,” he added grimly, “it had been worse for you and your family.”</p>
			<p>“Treason and theft?” Ma’ame Colombe exclaimed in hot indignation. “You must take it from me, young man, citizen, captain, or whatever you may be, that I’ll allow no one to⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hold your tongue, woman,” the officer broke in curtly; “you do yourself no good by these protests. Obedience is your wisest course.”</p>
			<p>“Good or no good,” Ma’ame Colombe persisted heatedly, “I won’t have the word theft used in connection with this house, and if⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Make your wife hold her tongue, citizen,” the officer, now addressing Hector once more, broke in curtly, “or I shall have to send her to the poste for interfering with a soldier of the Republic in the execution of his duty.”</p>
			<p>Poor Hector Colombe, whose choler was shrinking in inverse ratio to that of his wife, did his best to pacify the worthy dame.</p>
			<p>“It is all a mistake, Angelique,” he said gently. “M’sieu’ le Capitaine⁠—pardon! the citizen captain thinks that Amédé has some papers and valuables belonging to Madame⁠—I mean, to the Citizeness Frontenac⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Are they calling my Amédé a thief, then?” Ma’ame Colombe demanded hotly.</p>
			<p>“No! No!” Hector replied, trying to be patient and conciliatory. “Have I not told you that it is all a mistake? Every one knows there are no thieves in this house; but it seems the authorities think that Amédé may have hidden those valuables pour le bon motif.”</p>
			<p>“If he had,” the mother retorted obstinately, “he would say so. Let me just ask him⁠—”</p>
			<p>Hector had hold of her hand, but she wrenched it free, and before any of the soldiers could bar the way, she had run into the back parlour, shouting:</p>
			<p>“Amédé, my little one, have you told those soldiers that you know nothing of Madame’s valuables? Why, nom de Dieu!” she went on, hands on hips, defiant and aggressive like the true female defending its young, “look at the innocent. Is that the face of a thief?”</p>
			<p>She pointed at Amédé, who, however, remained strangely silent.</p>
			<p>“Voyons, mon petit, tell them!” Angelique Colombe went on with perhaps a shade less assurance than she had displayed at first. The next moment, however, the Captain had seized her unceremoniously by the arm, and dragged her back into the front shop. Here he gave her arm a good shake.</p>
			<p>“Did I not order you to hold your tongue?” he demanded roughly.</p>
			<p>Cowed, in spite of herself, not so much by the officer’s tone of command as by Amédé’s silence, Ma’ame Colombe did in effect, hold her tongue. A sense of disaster as well as of shame had suddenly descended upon her. Her ample bosom heaving, she sank into a chair and threw her apron over her head. She was not crying, but she felt the need of shutting out from her vision, the picture of Amédé looking so confused and sullen, of Hector looking as perplexed as she was herself, as well as of that magnificent officer with his fine clothes and his tricolour sash. But chiefly she wanted for the moment to lose sight of that crowd of gaffers and urchins and neighbours, all staring at her, with that unexplainable feeling, not exactly of contentment for her misfortune, but which can only be expressed by that untranslatable word <i>Schadenfreude</i>. Thus shut out from the rest of her little world, the poor woman slowly rocked herself backwards and forwards, murmuring inaudible words under cover of her apron, until she heard the captain’s voice saying abruptly:</p>
			<p>“Were you the officer in charge of detachment number ninety-seven?”</p>
			<p>Curiosity got the better of sorrow, and Ma’ame Colombe peeped round the edge of her apron. The picture which she saw made her drop her apron altogether. The lieutenant who, the night before, had been so overbearing and so hilarious, stood before his superior officer now, a humble, dejected figure, dreading reprimand, like a schoolboy fearing the cane.</p>
			<p>“I am in charge of the detachment ninety-seven⁠—yes, citizen captain,” he replied haltingly.</p>
			<p>What a contrast these two! Ma’ame Colombe, in spite of her anxiety, her indignation and what not, could not help but compare. Woman-like, she had an eye for the handsome male, and what more gorgeous than this Captain of the Republican, or revolutionary army, as he apparently liked to style his men, with his braided jacket and superb tricolour sash, with his blonde hair and fierce moustachios? He poked his tufted chin out at the bedraggled-looking lieutenant before him, looked down with obvious contempt at the latter’s ragged coat and mud-stained breeches. But he made no remark on the want of cleanliness and decency, as Ma’ame Colombe expected him to do.</p>
			<p>“Where do you come from?” he demanded.</p>
			<p>“From Orange, citizen captain.”</p>
			<p>“What is your objective?”</p>
			<p>“After this, Serres, citizen captain, and then Valence.”</p>
			<p>“And your orders are to arrest on the way every person suspected of treason against the Republic?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, citizen.”</p>
			<p>“And how have you obeyed these orders, citizen lieutenant?” the captain demanded sternly.</p>
			<p>“I have done my best, citizen captain,” the other replied with an attempt at bluster; “at Vaison⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I am not talking of Vaison, which you know quite well, citizen lieutenant. I wish to know how you obeyed the orders given to you to arrest the ci-devant Frontenac, his wife and daughter?”</p>
			<p>“Citizen⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Have you done it, citizen lieutenant?” the officer thundered, and all of the bluster went out of the subaltern as he stammered meekly:</p>
			<p>“When we reached the house of the ci-devant Frontenacs, the two women had gone.”</p>
			<p>“Gone?” and the Captain’s voice boomed through the low-raftered room like distant roll of cannon. “Gone? Whither?”</p>
			<p>“Gone, citizen captain,” the lieutenant murmured under his breath: “spirited away. The devil alone knows how.”</p>
			<p>“Which means that there is a traitor among you.”</p>
			<p>“Citizen captain⁠—” the other protested.</p>
			<p>“A traitor I say. You had secret orders, and yet the women were warned!” And once more the officer’s glance flashed down with scorn on his unfortunate subordinate. His blonde hair seemed to bristle with wrath; his moustachios stood out like spikes: he looked a veritable god of vengeance and of wrath.</p>
			<p>“Where,” he thundered, “is the ci-devant Frontenac?”</p>
			<p>“At the commissariat, citizen captain, guarded by our men,” the lieutenant replied.</p>
			<p>“And the rest of your detachment?”</p>
			<p>“In billets in the village.”</p>
			<p>“And did you search this house when you entered it?”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—that is⁠—no⁠—I did not⁠—that is⁠—” stammered the wretched man.</p>
			<p>“Or the other houses where you billeted your men?”</p>
			<p>But this time the lieutenant only shook his head in dejected silence.</p>
			<p>“Which means that you allowed soldiers of the Republic to sleep under strange roofs without ascertaining whether they were safe. Why, citizen Lieutenant, this place might have been swarming with traitors.”</p>
			<p>“The people here, citizen, are⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Enough. You are relieved of your command, and you will proceed now with us to Sisteron where you will render an account of your conduct before the Committee of Public Safety.”</p>
			<p>Ma’ame Colombe, who had watched the two men closely during this exciting colloquy, saw an ashen hue spread over the Lieutenant’s face, beneath the thick coating of grime. Though they did not know much in this tucked-away corner of Dauphiné, of what went on in the great cities, they had vaguely heard how great officers of the army had been deprived of their rank and sent to the guillotine for not doing their duty by the army of the Republic. The crowd at the door had also listened in silence; many a cheek turned pale at sound of that thundering voice which held in its arrogant tone a menace of death.</p>
			<p>And now the captain turned to the other two down-at-heel soldiers who stood skulking behind their lieutenant.</p>
			<p>“Go,” he commanded, “round the billets where your comrades are. Bring them hither. And one of you to the commissariat, and bring the ci-devant here too. And no delay, remember. No gossip on the way as you value your lives. I give you five minutes to have all the men and the prisoner here.”</p>
			<p>The men went immediately to execute the peremptory order, while the lieutenant remained in the shop looking the picture of humility and dejection. Ma’ame Colombe who had a kindly heart inside her ample bosom, felt almost sorry for the man, so miserable did he look. Indeed it seemed as if this squad of elegantly clad soldiers sowed anguish and terror in their path.</p>
			<p>But the worst was yet to come. Ma’ame Colombe thought that she had probed the last depths of humiliation when she heard that gorgeous officer call her Amédé a thief. To such a pass had this so-called revolution brought the respectable children of France, that they saw themselves bullied and insulted, and held up to shame before their neighbours. What was all that in comparison with the shame of seeing Amédé confronted with the proof that in very truth he was in possession of papers and valuables which were the property of Madame de Frontenac?</p>
			<p>It all happened so quickly. Poor Ma’ame Colombe could scarce believe her eyes. All that she saw was two soldiers guided by their sumptuous captain go straight through the back parlour and out by the back door into the yard. What happened out there she did not know, but a minute or two later the three men were standing once more in the parlour, and the captain had in his hand a small box, a thick leather wallet and a bag which obviously contained money.</p>
			<p>At sight of these Amédé⁠—her Amédé⁠—had jumped to his feet as if he had been stung; all the blood rushed to his face, and made it crimson with choler, and it looked for the moment as if he would hurl himself on the officer of the Republican army⁠—which would have meant instant death for him, as the soldiers had already shouldered their muskets. Ma’ame Colombe gave a terrified shriek, whereat Amédé suddenly seemed to realize his position, the flush died out of his poor face, and with eyes downcast he resumed his former silent, constrained attitude.</p>
			<p>The Captain shrugged his shoulders and with a note of dry sarcasm in his voice he said:</p>
			<p>“I see you make no attempt at denial. You are wise, citizen. Try and induce your mother not to shriek and you’ll find that everything will turn out for the best.”</p>
			<p>He did not say this unkindly, and poor Ma’ame Colombe even thought that she detected an indulgent tone in his voice. She rose to her feet and put her podgy hands together, and when the Captain re-entered the shop, she looked up at him with tearful, entreating eyes.</p>
			<p>“He did it with a good motive, M’sieu’ le⁠—I mean citizen captain. Look at the innocent. He is no thief. I swear he is no thief. I’d like,” she went on, turning fiercely round and darting defiant glances on the crowd of gaffers on the doorstep, “I’d like to see the man who dared to say that my Amédé is a thief.”</p>
			<p>The officer had handed the <i>pièces de conviction</i> to one of his men, with orders to put them in the wagon. Then he commanded Amédé to stand up before him.</p>
			<p>“Thief or no thief,” he said dryly, “you are guilty of having acted contrary to the interests of the Republic. You know what that means?”</p>
			<p>Amédé made no reply, only hung his head, and twiddled his hot fingers together.</p>
			<p>“It means,” the officer continued, “that but for one thing, your life would have had to answer for this act of treason.”</p>
			<p>A groan went round the crowd on whose ears those words had fallen like the toll of a passing bell. But Ma’ame Colombe did not utter a sound. She clung to her Hector and the two old people stood there hand in hand, striving by this loving contact to conquer the icy fear that had gripped their hearts.</p>
			<p>“The one thing that will probably save you,” the officer resumed after a dramatic pause, “is that the Republic has need of you in her revolutionary army. The enemy is at the gates of France, you are young, healthy, vigorous; it is for you to show your mettle by defending your country. Thus you will redeem the past. For the moment it is my duty to take you before the Committee of Public Safety, whose final word will dispose of your fate.”</p>
			<p>He spoke loudly so that all the listeners might hear. Gaffers and urchins and market-women hardly dared to breathe. They felt awed, and could only gaze at one another, as if trying to read each other’s thoughts. And while awed whispers still went the round, the down-at-heel soldiers, who had spent the night in the village, came skulking back in groups of two or threes. They pushed their way through the crowd into the shop. One of the last to arrive was M. de Frontenac, closely guarded by two of the men.</p>
			<p>And there they all stood now in the shop, a dozen or so of them, beside the sacks of haricots and button-onions and split peas; all of them with the exception of the prisoner, looking dirty and bedraggled, with their worsted caps covered in dust, bits of hay and straw clinging to their coats and to their hair, bare-legged and grimy-faced, the steel of their bayonets dull with sludge, their breeches mud-stained. Such a contrast to their superb officer and his splendidly attired squad. And they could hear the women drawing humiliating comparisons, tittering and pointing fingers of scorn at them, whilst even the drabs, with whom they had drunk and jested the night before, turned contemptuous shoulders upon them now.</p>
			<p>And thus they were mustered before the magnificent captain; all soldiers together, shoulder to shoulder, the down-at-heel and the grandees⁠—aristos one would have called them, only that they were of the Revolutionary Army, which set out to exterminate the very last of the aristocracy, the hated tyrants and dissolute brood. And while they stood there, under the eye of the officer, the crowd outside watched them, and instinctively something of the spirit that animated the rest of France, swept like a poisonous sirocco over these worthy villagers of Laragne; the same spirit that in the great cities sent old women knitting and gossiping at the foot of the guillotine and that prompted young girls to dip their kerchiefs in the blood of its victims. A poisonous wind like the breath of demons! Some of the men and women had been to Sisteron and heard the hymn of hate, the <i>Carmagnole</i>! “Ca ira! Ca ira! Les aristos a la lanterne!” One or two of them began to hum it, stamping their feet to its rhythm.</p>
			<p>Gradually the song swelled, one after another they took up the tune, these village men and maids who, unbeknown even to themselves had absorbed some of the insidious poison of hatred and black envy.</p>
			<p>“Right! Turn!” the Captain commanded, and marking time with their feet, the little squad now over twenty strong, started on its way. Ma’ame Colombe, now loudly moaning, still clung to her boy. He was very brave and tried to reassure and to comfort her. Anyway he would have had to go to-day, he argued, his orders were to report himself at Serres, to be drafted into the army. From the officer’s attitude it certainly seemed as if nothing more terrifying was to happen to him. The boy was brave enough too not to let his mother know how doubly his heart ached, because he was saying good-bye to his home, and could not say good-bye to Fleurette. His heart was filled with the image of Fleurette, but he would not add to his mother’s sorrow by speaking to her of his own. He was just an unsophisticated village lad, knowing little, understanding less. His own life and comfort were nothing to him, beside the sorrow which his mother felt and which, he knew, would bring such countless tears in Fleurette’s lovely blue eyes. The father too tried to be brave; the effort to keep back his tears brought the perspiration streaming down his round, kindly face. When the crowd⁠—his friends and neighbours some of them⁠—intoned the revolutionary song, his powerful fist was clenched, but he did not shake it at the singers. His sound common sense had come again to his rescue, and whispered to him that for Amédé’s sake, quiet submission was the soundest policy.</p>
			<p>While mother and son clung to one another in a last farewell. Hector contrived to approach M. de Frontenac who, alone in the midst of such excitement and such conflicting emotions, had remained perfectly calm. The casual observer, not knowing him, might have thought that the fate of his wife and daughter, his separation from them, and the blow that destiny had dealt to these worthy folk here, whom he had known all his life, had left him completely indifferent. He had spent the night in a prison cell, under the eye of men⁠—the local gendarmes⁠—whose welfare and whose families had been his care for years; but seemingly he had slept peacefully. At any rate his face showed no sign of fatigue, or his eyes of sleeplessness. He had dressed with scrupulous care; his well-worn clothes, the ones he was wearing at dinner when the soldiers made irruption into the château, were clean and tidily put on; his cravat neatly tied, his hair smooth. When Hector Colombe approached him, he gripped the worthy épicier warmly by the hand.</p>
			<p>And now the crowd parted to allow the soldiers to pass. Some of the girls tried to ogle the handsome ones and to leer at the others, but no one attempted to do more than stare in awe and admiration at the magnificent officer. The two prisoners were ordered to mount into the wagon; one of the soldiers took the reins and the next moment the order, “Quick March!” was given.</p>
			<p>The crowd broke into an excited “Hurrah!” and the little squad slowly moved off, officer en tête, and the wagon in the rear, in the direction of Sisteron. Then one of the villagers once more struck up the <i>Carmagnole</i>, and the crowd took it up. “Ca ira! ça ira!” they sang gaily, and the men took the girls by the waist and twirled them round in a gay rigadoon. Old men and young girls; for there were no young men in the villages of France these days, when the army claimed them all, they danced and twirled in the wake of the retreating squad, and around them bare-footed urchins somersaulted along in the cloud of dust raised by the horses and wagon.</p>
			<p>And that was the picture that Amédé Colombe and Charles de Frontenac, sitting side by side in the wagon, saw gradually receding before their eyes as they were driven away, prisoners from their homes.</p>
			<p>
				<br/>
				<br/>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>
				<a id="chap13"/>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
