<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p>It was on the following day that the <i xml:lang="fr">coche</i> from Sisteron was due to arrive at Orange, and Lieutenant Godet, his mind set on the one purpose, to find a clue to his mysterious adventure with the English spies, hied him to the posting-inn which is situated in the Rue de la République.</p>
			<p>At noon the <i xml:lang="fr">coche</i>, covered with dust, unloaded its wearied passengers; a farmer and his son come to negotiate a sale of stock; the wife of Citizen Henriot, the lawyer, home from her annual visit to her mother; two or three skilled artisans from the country, come to seek their fortune in town, and so on; and finally there descended from the <i xml:lang="fr">coche</i> two women, one of whom carried a small bundle, while the other⁠—well! at sight of the other Citizen Lieutenant Godet uttered such a cry of surprise and of excitement that the crowd around him thought that here was a poor soldier who had taken leave of his senses.</p>
			<p>The woman who had caused Lieutenant Godet thus to lose his self-control, was a perfectly self-possessed young woman wrapped in a cloak and hood from beneath which peeped strands of golden curls that vied in colour with the ripe corn of the Dauphiné, and eyes bluer than the sky that spread over Orange on this exquisite midday in May. The older woman who accompanied her appeared travel-stained, weary and cross; not so this beautiful girl, who tripped lightly from the <i xml:lang="fr">coche</i> towards the parlour of the posting-inn and with a little air of triumph and encouragement called gaily to her companion:</p>
			<p>“The end of our journey, my Louise! And now to find Bibi!”</p>
			<p>Even in these days of advanced democracy which in Orange had of late reached its apogee, the shattering of ancient manners and customs had not got to the stage where a beautiful woman would not command the attention and services of impressionable males, to the exclusion of others less favoured. And thus it came to pass that while the other weary and travel-stained passengers were left to look after themselves and their bits of luggage, and to wait their turn until such time as the servants of the inn were pleased to get them refreshments, the landlord himself, a florid man in shirt sleeves and baize apron, bustled obsequiously around Fleurette and Louise, offering wine, bread and advice, polishing the chairs on which they were invited to sit, and generally placing himself and his house at the disposal of this attractive customer.</p>
			<p>Fleurette took all these attentions as a matter of course. She was accustomed to being the centre of attraction at Lou Mas or in the house of M’sieu’ and Ma’ame Colombe, and although her trust in the goodwill of men had received one or two somewhat rude shocks of late, she still retained that self-possession and gentle air of mingled modesty and graciousness which is the attribute of every pretty, unspoilt woman. She asked for a room where she and her companion might tidy their kerchiefs and caps, and use their precious piece of scented soap, and she felt so triumphant and so elated that when she found herself in the privacy of that room she took poor old Louise by the waist and twirled her round and round in a mad dance.</p>
			<p>“We are in Orange, Louise darling!” she cried. “We are here! here! here! and in less than an hour we shall have found Bibi, and Bibi will have commanded Amédé to be set free! Just think of it, Louise,” she went on more seriously, “four whole days since he was arrested! Poor, poor Amédé, under a horrible accusation of a sin which he never committed! What he must have suffered! What he must have thought of me who knew the truth and did not at once set to work to obtain his freedom.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Gradually her tone became more and more dull, all the excitement died out of it. She saw Amédé in prison, with irons round his wrists and ankles, or else standing before stern judges who condemned him to a terrible punishment, because he held his tongue, and would not accuse the real delinquent, who was none other than she, Fleurette. She sighed, and her eyes now were full of tears, while old Louise, stolidly, and with much grumbling, got some water and proceeded to wash her face and hands and to tidy her dress.</p>
			<p>“Come, child,” she said dryly after a while, “we’ll go down now and get something to eat.”</p>
			<p>She had never ceased to protest against the madness of this adventure, prophesying every kind of calamity for them both: but Fleurette with the quiet obstinacy of the habitually meek had persisted. She had begun by wheedling the money out of Louise, then obtained the passes for places in the <i xml:lang="fr">coche</i>. Once on the way, it would of course have been ridiculous to turn tail and go back, and Louise, led unconsciously by a force of will stronger than her own, had found herself meekly acquiescing in all the arrangements which Fleurette made on the way. As a matter of fact she had not ceased to marvel at the child. Here was this young thing, who had never travelled in a <i xml:lang="fr">coche</i> before, who had never in her life been further than Serres and Sisteron, calmly undertaking a three days’ journey, sleeping and eating in strange inns, and arriving at her destination unscathed. There certainly was a miracle in all this good luck, for old Louise had heard many a tale of what terrible adventures usually befell unprotected females upon the high roads. What she did not realize was that the miracle merely consisted in the fact that in these outlying corners of beautiful France, in Dauphiné and in Provence, there was still plenty of the good old kindly stock left, some of the chivalry, the warmth of heart, the bonhomie, which all the tyranny and the cruelty perpetrated in the great cities had not contrived to kill; and that there was something in Fleurette’s beauty, her simplicity as well as her determination, which brought forth that chivalry and bonhomie and helped her to win through.</p>
			<p>When the two women returned to the parlour where hot milk and country bread awaited them, they were met by a young soldier, who very politely and deferentially claimed acquaintance with them.</p>
			<p>“You would not remember me, citizeness,” he said more particularly addressing Fleurette, “but I and some very weary soldiers under my command, are deeply indebted to you for your kindness to us, when, like a good Samaritan, you gave us food and drink, on the bridge near your home. Do you remember?”</p>
			<p>He looked very bedraggled and out-at-elbows, but frank and kind. Fleurette raised shy, blue eyes up to his, and gave a little gasp of recognition. She well remembered the soldier. She remembered how sorry she had been for them all, in their shabby clothes and stockingless feet, weary and thirsty, and how she had sent Adèle out to them with food and drink. She also remembered, though she would not remind him of that, that he had been very curt and uncivil with her, had made a sneering remark when she told him that she was Citizen Armand’s daughter, and also that the men under his command had been positively cruel to a poor inoffensive old man whom she afterwards befriended.</p>
			<p>However, for the moment, she was perhaps conscious of a slight feeling of relief at sight of a familiar face; she had seen nothing but strangers ever since she left Laragne four days ago. So when the soldier, still speaking quite deferentially, reiterated his: “Do you remember?” she replied simply: “Of course I do, citizen lieutenant.” Which goes to prove that Fleurette had learned a great deal in the past three days, and the word “citizen” now came quite glibly to her tongue.</p>
			<p>Lieutenant Godet had told her his name, told her that he was a native of Orange and was home on leave for a few days.</p>
			<p>“A real piece of luck,” he went on lightly, “seeing that perhaps I might be of service to you.”</p>
			<p>The two women sat down at the table and he helped to wait on them, brought them bread and cheese and a jug of hot milk, and bustled the maid of the inn if the latter appeared negligent. He made himself very agreeable to Louise, talked of his own journey, and inquired after her adventures. Louise, despite her innate suspicion of soldiers, gradually unbent to him. The warm food further put her into a good temper, and presently the three of them were conversing in the most amicable manner.</p>
			<p>When the meal had been duly paid for, the soldier once more offered his services. Could he pilot the citizenesses through the town?</p>
			<p>“Well yes, you can,” Louise said resolutely, “we want to find M’sieu’ Armand.”</p>
			<p>“Citizen Armand,” Fleurette broke in, “my father. I think you know him, citizen lieutenant.”</p>
			<p>“Know him?” he exclaimed, “of course I know Armand. Who does not know Citizen Armand in Orange?”</p>
			<p>“Then he is here now?” Fleurette cried eagerly.</p>
			<p>“Of a surety he is.”</p>
			<p>“You know where he lodges?”</p>
			<p>“Everyone in Orange knows where Citizen Armand lodges.”</p>
			<p>“Then you can take me to him?”</p>
			<p>“At your service, citizeness.”</p>
			<p>“Now?”</p>
			<p>“When you wish.”</p>
			<p>With a little cry of delight Fleurette gathered up her cloak.</p>
			<p>“Let us go,” she said simply.</p>
			<p>Louise sighing, but stolid, followed meekly. The thought that she would soon relinquish her wayward charge into the keeping of M’sieu’ Armand was a comforting one; Fleurette was tripping it gaily beside the soldier, but the latter’s dirty clothes and bedraggled appearance still filled old Louise with mistrust.</p>
			<p>They crossed the river by the old bridge and then trudged along the dusty streets to a great open place, now called Place de la République. The soldier led the way across the square to a tall stone building, flanked by a square tower, to which a flight of steps gave access. He seemed to know his way about. At the top of the steps a couple of soldiers in somewhat tidier uniforms than his own, were on guard. They stood in what Louise, who had old-fashioned notions as to the behaviour of soldiers on duty, put down as a slouchy and disrespectful attitude. When Lieutenant Godet walked past them, they did not salute. This want of respect of the soldier for his officer was another manifestation, it seems, of Equality and Fraternity. Louise, with her nose in the air, sailed past in the wake of Godet and Fleurette.</p>
			<p>After crossing a wide vestibule and turning on the right into a long paved corridor, Lieutenant Godet came to a halt before a door which bore the legend: “Committee of Public Safety, Section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.” Beside the door another soldier, also in very shabby uniform, stood leaning upon his bayonet. Fleurette, overawed by the vastness and silence of the place, gazed with vague terror at this man who without uttering a word had put his bayonet athwart the door and held it there, barring the way, motionless as a statue. Lieutenant Godet then spoke to him:</p>
			<p>“The citizeness,” he said, “is the daughter of Citizen Chauvelin. She desires to speak with him!”</p>
			<p>The daughter of Citizen Chauvelin? What did the man mean? Fleurette, puzzled and frowning, pulled him by the sleeve. She was the daughter of Citizen Armand: she’d never heard the name of Chauvelin before. Nevertheless the soldier on guard lowered his bayonet. Godet pushed open the door and the next moment Fleurette found herself facing a large desk which was covered with papers, and behind which Bibi was sitting, writing. A voice said loudly:</p>
			<p>“Citizen Chauvelin, here’s your daughter come to see you.”</p>
			<p>Whereupon Bibi raised his head and looked at her, staring as if he had seen a ghost.</p>
			<p>Forgetting everything save the joy of seeing <span xml:lang="fr">chéri</span> Bibi at last, Fleurette gave a glad little cry, ran round the table, and came to halt on her knees beside Bibi’s chair, with her arms round his neck.</p>
			<p>She felt so glad, so glad, that she was ready to cry.</p>
			<p>“Bibi,” she said softly, whispering in his ear, “<span xml:lang="fr">chéri</span> Bibi, are you not glad to see me?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
