<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
			<p>Parting is not such sweet sorrow as the greatest of all poets would have us believe. At any rate Fleurette did not find it at all sweet, on this her eighteenth birthday, which should have been a very happy one.</p>
			<p>It was bad enough saying “adieu” to Bibi. But Fleurette was accustomed to that. Of late Bibi had been so often and so long absent from home; sometimes weeks⁠—nay! months⁠—would elapse and there would be no Bibi to fondle Fleurette and bring life and animation within those whitewashed walls that held all that was dearest to her in the world. It was undoubtedly heartrending to bid Bibi adieu: but in a way, one knew that the darling would come back to Lou Mas as soon as he was able, come for one of those surprise visits that made Fleurette as gay as a linnet all the while they lasted. But to say goodbye to Amédé was a different matter. He was going into the army. He was going to fight the English. Le Bon Dieu alone knew if Amédé would ever come back. Perhaps he would be killed. Perhaps⁠—oh! perhaps⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>Never in her life had Fleurette been so sad.</p>
			<p>And now the last goodbyes had been said. Bibi, accompanied by M’sieu’ Colombe and Amédé, had walked away in the direction of the village, where he would pick up his horse, and start along the main road that led to Serres and thence to Paris.</p>
			<p>Fleurette remained on the bridge for some time, shading her eyes against the sun, because they ached so from all the tears which she had shed. The three men had become mere specks, ’way down the road: old Louise had gone back to her kitchen with Adèle, only Fleurette remained standing on the bridge alone. Tears were still running down her cheeks, whilst with aching eyes she strove to catch a last sight of Bibi as he and his two companions disappeared round the bend of the road. Or was it Amédé she was trying to see?</p>
			<p>The afternoon sun had spread a mantle of gold over the snowy crests of Pelvoux: on the sapphire sky myriads of tiny clouds seemed to hold hearts of living flame in their fleecy bosoms. The wavy ribbon of the Buëche was like a giant mirror that reflected a whole gamut of glowing tints, blue and gold, and purple, whilst on the winding road, the infinitesimal atoms of dust seemed like low-lying clouds of powdered topaz. Suddenly in the direction of Sisteron those clouds rose, more dense: something more solid than powdered topaz, animated the distance: grew gradually more tangible and then became definite. Fleurette now could easily distinguish ten or a dozen men coming this way. They all wore red caps on their heads. Ahead of them came a man on horseback. He wore a tricorne hat, adorned with a tricolour cockade, and the sun drew sparks of flame from the steel bit in his horse’s mouth and from the brass bosses and buckles on the harness.</p>
			<p>Now Fleurette could hear the dull stamping of hoofs on the dusty road, and the tramping of heavy, weary footsteps: and she watched, fascinated, these men coming along.</p>
			<p>All at once the rider put his horse to a trot, and the next moment he reined in on the bridge. He put out his hand and cried a sharp: “Halte!” whereupon the other men all came to a halt. Fleurette stood there wondering what all this meant. Vaguely she guessed that these men must be soldiers, though, of a truth, with the exception of the one on horseback, and who appeared to be their officer, there was very little that was soldierly about them. Their red caps were of worsted, and adorned with what had once been a tricolour cockade, but was now so covered with dust that the colours were well-nigh distinguishable. The men’s coats too, once blue in colour and fitted with brass buttons, were torn and faded, with several buttons missing: their breeches were stained with mud, they had no stockings inside their shoes, and it would have been impossible to say definitely whether their shirts had been of a drabby grey when they were new, or whether they had become so under stress of wear and dirt. Fleurette’s recollection flew back to the smart soldiers she used to see when she was a tiny tot and Bibi took her to Serres or Sisteron on fête days when the military band would march past in their beautiful clothes all glittering with brass buttons, and their boots polished up so that you could almost see yourself in them.</p>
			<p>But there! everyone knew that these were terribly hard times and that new clothes were very, very dear: so Fleurette supposed that the poor soldiers had to wear out their old ones just like everybody else. And her sensitive little heart gave an extra throb or two, for she had suddenly remembered that M’sieu’ Amédé would also be a soldier very soon, wearing a shabby coat, and perhaps no stockings inside his shoes. Still thinking of M’sieu’ Amédé, she was very polite to the man on horseback, although he was unnecessarily abrupt with her, asking her gruffly whether Citizen Armand was within.</p>
			<p>Fleurette said “No!” quite gently, and then, choosing to ignore the coarse manner in which the man uttered a very ugly oath, she went on: “Father has been gone a quarter of an hour and more, and if you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Citizen Armand, I asked for,” the officer broke in roughly, “not your father.”</p>
			<p>“Father’s name is Armand,” Fleurette said, still speaking very politely. “I thought you were asking for him.”</p>
			<p>The horseman, she thought, realizing his mistake, should have excused himself for speaking so rudely: but he did nothing of the sort. He just shrugged his shoulders and said in a very curious way, which sounded almost like a sneer:</p>
			<p>“Oh! is that how it is? You are Citizen Armand’s daughter, are you?”</p>
			<p>“Yes! M’sieu’ l’officier.”</p>
			<p>“Call me citizen lieutenant,” the man retorted roughly. “Hasn’t your father taught you to speak like a good patriot?”</p>
			<p>Fleurette would not have admitted for the world that she was half afraid of this unkempt, unshaved officer with the gruff voice, but she felt intimidated, shy, ill at ease. She would have given worlds to have someone friendly beside her, old Louise, for instance, or even Adèle.</p>
			<p>“Shall I call M’ame Louise,” she suggested, “to speak with you?”</p>
			<p>“No,” the man replied curtly, “what’s the use if your father isn’t there? Which way did he go?”</p>
			<p>“To the village first, M’sieu’⁠—I mean citizen, to pick up his horse which he always leaves at M’sieu’ Colombe’s stables. He is going to Paris afterwards.”</p>
			<p>“How far is it to the village?”</p>
			<p>“Less than a quarter of a league⁠—er⁠—citizen.”</p>
			<p>“And the house,” the officer asked again, “where the ci-devant Frontenacs live, is that far?”</p>
			<p>“About half a league by the road from here,” Fleurette replied, “the other side of the village. There is a shortcut behind this house, past the mill, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>The man, however, was no longer listening to what she said. He muttered something that sounded very much like an oath, and then turned to the soldiers: “Allons! Marche!” he commanded sharply. The men appeared terribly dusty and tired and hardly made a movement to obey: at the first call of “Halte,” some of them had thrown themselves down by the edge of the road and stretched out full length on the heaps of hard stones piled up there; others had wandered down the slope by the bridge, and lying flat on the ground were slaking their thirst in the cool, clear water of the stream. Fleurette was very sorry for them.</p>
			<p>“May they wait a moment, M’sieu’ le⁠—I mean citizen lieutenant,” she pleaded, “I’ll get them something to drink. We haven’t much, but I know Louise won’t⁠—”</p>
			<p>But the officer took no further notice either of her or of the men. Having given his order to march, he had readjusted the reins in his hands, and struck his spurs somewhat viciously into his horse’s flanks. The horse reared and plunged for a moment, then started off at a sharp trot, clouds of dust flying out from under its hoofs.</p>
			<p>The men made an effort to rise. Fleurette put up a finger and smiled at them all.</p>
			<p>“Wait one minute,” she said, and ran quickly back into the house.</p>
			<p>There was the best part of a bottle left of that good red wine: Bibi had not touched it again after he broke the stem of his glass. Fleurette had picked up the bottle and taken a tin mug from the dresser and was about to start out again before Louise thought of asking her what she was up to.</p>
			<p>“There are some poor, tired soldiers outside on the bridge,” Fleurette replied, “I want to take them something to drink. There’s not much of it, and twelve of them to share it, but it will be better than nothing, and perhaps le bon Dieu will make a miracle and make it be enough. They seemed so thirsty, poor dears.”</p>
			<p>“Let Adèle go,” Louise said curtly, “I don’t like you speaking with those vagabonds.”</p>
			<p>And while Adèle ran out, as she was bid, with mug and bottle, Louise continued to mutter half under her breath:</p>
			<p>“I can’t abide those sans-culottes. Brigands the lot of them. What are they doing in the neighbourhood, I’d like to know. Up to no good you may depend. Let Adèle talk to them. It is not fit for a well-brought-up wench like you to be seen in such company.”</p>
			<p>Fleurette did not pay much attention to old Louise’s mutterings. There was plenty to do in the house with washing up and tidying things away. And it was Louise’s habit to grumble at anything that was in any way unusual: a wet day in August, or a mild one in December, a calèche on the road, a horseman, a soldier, or a letter for Bibi. She was always called “old Louise,” although, in truth, she had scarce reached middle age; but her skin was dry and rough like the soil of her native Dauphiné, her face and hands were prematurely wrinkled and her voice had become harsh of late, probably for want of use, like a piece of mechanism that has stood still, and begun to grind for want of a lubricant. In Armand’s house, when he was absent, she ruled supreme. Fleurette never dreamed of disobeying, and Armand’s only peremptory orders to Louise were never to mention politics or current events to the child.</p>
			<p>Louise had nursed Fleurette at her breast when Fleurette’s mother died in childbed, and she had left her own baby in the care of her sister, already a widow and childless. Considerations of money had prompted her at the time, for Monsieur Armand, as he was then, had made her liberal offers: afterwards it was too late to regret. Her own daughter, Adèle, born of an unknown father who loved and rode away, had been brought up to a life of drudgery by her aunt, who sent the girl out to earn her own living as soon as she could toddle, whilst Fleurette was brought up to have everything she wanted; petted and idolized by a father plentifully supplied with money. Fleurette and Adèle were foster-sisters, but with destinies as wide apart as the peaks of Pelvoux.</p>
			<p>But Louise never spoke one bitter word when she saw Adèle with toil-worn hands scrubbing the kitchen floor on which Fleurette trod with dainty, high-heeled shoes. Perhaps she loved her foster-child more than she did her own: perhaps it was only the same considerations of money that already guided her conduct before, which prompted her later to indulgence toward the rich man’s daughter, whilst reserving her pent-up acrimony for the household drudge. No one knew what Louise’s feelings were towards Adèle⁠—Adèle herself least of all. The girl was silent, reserved, self-contained, very conscientious in her work, but not very responsive to the many kindnesses shown her by M’sieu’ Armand or Mam’zelle Fleurette. She still lived with her aunt who had brought her up, and she appeared to lay no claim on her mother’s affection: she had earned her own living ever since she was ten years of age, and now, at eighteen, she looked more like a woman than a girl: her little face was all pinched up, the lips thin, the eyes either sharp as needles or expressionless like those of a rodent. She hardly ever spoke and no one had ever seen her smile.</p>
			<p>Old Louise’s mutterings presently turned to Adèle’s prolonged absence:</p>
			<p>“What is the girl about now, I should like to know? She is not a gossip as a rule.”</p>
			<p>She went on with her washing up for a moment or two longer and then said sharply:</p>
			<p>“Run along, Fleurette, and see what the wench is doing. Lazy baggage, with all the work there’s still to do.”</p>
			<p>Fleurette ran out at once. She too wondered why Adèle was such a long time. And there, sure enough, standing on the bridge was Adèle talking to the soldiers. The officer was already out of sight. Adèle talking! and Fleurette even thought that she heard her giggle. Incredible! The soldiers were all laughing and one of them was in the act of drinking the last drop cut of the tin mug.</p>
			<p>Fleurette stood for a moment on the doorstep, vaguely wondering what in the world had come over Adèle, when a rather curious incident occurred: the soldiers were all laughing, jesting apparently with the girl, and one of them, with head tilted back, was draining the last drop out of the tin mug. Fleurette was on the point of calling to Adèle when her attention was arrested by the appearance of an old man carrying what looked like a load of faggots tied up in a coarse sacking. He seemed to have climbed the slopes on the opposite side of the road; at any rate there he was, all of a sudden, immediately behind the group of soldiers.</p>
			<p>He appeared to be drunk, for he staggered as he walked and leaned heavily on a stout gnarled stick. Fleurette could not have told you exactly how it all happened, but all of a sudden Adèle’s giggling and the soldiers’ jests were interrupted by the old faggot-carrier tumbling down clumsily, right between them all.</p>
			<p>Adèle screamed. The soldiers swore, and one of them went to the length of giving the old man a savage kick, whilst two others incontinently picked him up between them and flung him over the parapet of the bridge. Fleurette gave a cry of dismay and ran to the poor man’s assistance. She felt hot with indignation at such wanton brutality. How right, she thought as she ran, had old Louise’s estimate been of these soldiers⁠—little better than brigands they were, and cruel to boot. The poor faggot-carrier, for such he seemed to be, was lying half in and half out of the stream: the grass and sloping ground had somewhat broken his fall, but nevertheless there he lay, motionless and groaning piteously. Fleurette called peremptorily to Adèle to come and help her hoist up the poor man on his legs again. He was very dirty, dressed in nothing but rags, his feet swathed in coarse bass matting; he was stockingless, shirtless and hatless; but he appeared to be powerfully built and Fleurette marvelled how he could have allowed himself to be thus maltreated without a struggle. No doubt he was drunk or crippled with rheumatism.</p>
			<p>Up on the bridge the soldiers were preparing to start once more on their way. They took no more notice of their unfortunate victim nor of Adèle; but Fleurette looking up felt that their last glance was for her; some of them were regarding her with a leer, others with more pronounced malevolence. She distinctly saw one man nudge his neighbour and point a finger at her: whereat both of them gave a mocking laugh.</p>
			<p>She felt hurt and indignant: in her sheltered life she had never met with malevolence before. However for the moment, her first care was for the poor faggot-carrier. Adèle had come to her assistance, and together the two girls succeeded in getting the old man on his legs again. He appeared more scared than hurt, and with his big, toil-stained hands, he felt himself all over to see, perhaps, if any bones were broken; and all the while he kept on murmuring rather pathetically: “Nom de nom, de nom de Dieu!” as if surprised that such a tragic adventure should have happened to him.</p>
			<p>Fleurette asked him if he were hurt, and he replied: “No, Mam’zelle⁠—that is citizeness,” and he added: “Ah, I shall never get used to these new ways. I am too old.”</p>
			<p>“Can you get on your way now?” Fleurette asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes! yes, Mam’zelle, that is citizeness. But,” he went on piteously, “I am so hungry. I come from over Mison way and I have not had a bite since seven o’clock this morning.”</p>
			<p>This naturally stirred Fleurette’s kind, compassionate heart. She told Adèle to run into the house and ask Louise for a hunk of bread. Adèle, silent and self-contained once more, obeyed without comment. The incident was closed as far as Fleurette was concerned. Her thoughts flew back to Amédé and to his last day and evening which he would be spending in his cosy home. She wished she had been bold enough to ask him to come and bid her a last adieu tomorrow morning before he went away to fight the English.</p>
			<p>And while she stood there gazing out over the valley where the metal cross on the church steeple of Laragne glistened like gold in the sunlight, a strange voice⁠—soft yet firm⁠—suddenly struck her ear from somewhere close behind her.</p>
			<p>“Papers and valuables are behind the panel in Madame’s room.”</p>
			<p>She swung round terrified, so terrified that the cry she was about to utter died away in her throat. She looked about her, scared, shivering with that nameless dread which assails every mortal in face of the supernatural. And yet everything seemed as peaceful as before: the little mill stream splashed and gurgled with its soft, persistent sound; in the old walnut tree a thrush was calling to its mate and the old faggot-carrier was busy tying up his faggots into the sacking again. Fleurette’s eyes rested for an instant anxiously upon him. She expected to see him raise his head, to look about him, to appear scared as she was herself; but he gave no sign of having heard anything of that mysterious voice, fresh and compelling like a command from heaven. Oh no! Fleurette could not have screamed. She was too panic-stricken just at first to utter a sound. And yet nothing had really happened to alarm the most timorous. Only those few words spoken by an unseen tongue. What did they mean? What could they mean? They were simple and commonplace enough: Fleurette repeated them to herself mechanically:</p>
			<p>“Papers and valuables are behind the panel in Madame’s room.”</p>
			<p>What did it mean? What papers? what valuables? and why should the mysterious speaker have wished her to know that they were behind the panel in Madame’s room? Madame was, of course, Madame de Frontenac over at the château, and all of a sudden Fleurette remembered that the mounted soldier had asked her the way to the château. Gradually she was feeling less scared. Less scared but more excited. She looked round at the statue of <abbr>St.</abbr> Antoine, at whose feet she had this morning placed a fresh bunch of forget-me-nots. Somehow she associated the mysterious voice with <abbr>St.</abbr> Antoine. Perhaps Madame had lost some valuable papers, and the kind saint had chosen this means of letting her know where her treasure was. Fleurette made the sign of the cross on her bosom; she remembered the story of Jeanne d’Arc which <abbr>M.</abbr> le Curé used to tell her, of how the humble shepherdess of Domremy had been compelled by heavenly voices to go forth and deliver France from her enemies and never rest until she had seen the King crowned in his cathedral of Rheims.</p>
			<p>Fleurette felt something of that same fervour which had animated Jeanne d’Arc. She felt that she must go forth and tell Madame about the valuables and the papers. The evening was warm and she would not need her shawl. She could go just as she was as far as the château and be back before the twilight had faded into night. Adèle in the meanwhile appeared at the front door, she had her shawl over her head, and a hunk of bread in her hand. Then only did Fleurette remember the old faggot-carrier. She turned to him in order to bid him “Godspeed.” He stood there quite motionless, leaning upon his stick bending under the weight of his load of faggots which he had hoisted upon his back. His lank hair hung over his wrinkled forehead and half concealed his eyes. But, suddenly through the veil of lank grey hair Fleurette met the man’s glance fixed upon her; and her heart gave a queer jump. Those were not the eyes of a decrepit old man; they were young and clear and bright: of a luminous grey-blue, with heavy lids that could not wholly conceal the humorous twinkle in the eyes, nor yet the kindly, searching glance which was fixed on Fleurette.</p>
			<p>This was the moment when she really would have screamed. The sense of something ununderstandable, and unreal was more than she could bear, she would have screamed, but those twinkling, searching eyes held her, and at the same time seemed to reassure her, to tell her not to be afraid. She felt as if she were in a dream: unable to do anything, only to stare and stare at the old faggot-carrier, while gradually all her terrors seemed to fall away from her, and she was filled with a sense of courage and of determination. The whole incident, the voice, the glance, her terror and reassurance had lasted less than five seconds. Already Adèle was close by. She was bringing the bread for the poor, half-starved man, and Fleurette now watched him, fascinated, as he took the bread with a humble: “Merci, Mam’zelle,” and started at once on it, like a man who has not tasted food all day. He was just a decrepit old man, bent with rheumatism, dirty, unkempt, insecure on his tottering limbs. He even raised his eyes once, and once more looked at her; but the glance was dim like that of an old man; there was no twinkle in the eyes, only the weariness of poverty and old age.</p>
			<p>And Fleurette felt that she had dreamed it all: the voice, the glance, the message from <abbr>St.</abbr> Antoine, just as her terrors had faded from her, so now her excitement vanished too. It must all have been a dream. It <em>was</em> a dream! Perhaps old Louise, who was versed in all kinds of dreamlore, would know of an explanation for the whole mysterious occurrence. Feeling very tired all of a sudden⁠—for she felt the reaction after the tenseness of the last few moments, she went back into the house. In the doorway she turned to have a last look at the old faggot-carrier; leaning heavily upon his stick, he was making his way along the bank of the stream. The last she saw of him was his big bundle done up in sacking and his legs bending beneath the weight.</p>
			<p>Adèle wrapped in her shawl had gone the other way. She was already up on the bridge. With a little sigh of disappointment Fleurette went into the house. It had been such an exciting dream!</p>
			<p>But she did not speak about it to old Louise; she just went quietly about the house, doing one or two little bits of work that Adèle had left undone.</p>
			<p>The slowly sinking sun had turned the gold on Pelvoux’ snowy crest to a brilliant rose, when Fleurette suddenly announced to Louise that she was going over to the château. She often went there, and at all hours of the day.</p>
			<p>“So long as you are home before dark,” was Louise’s only remark. “I don’t like those down-at-heel soldiers being about.”</p>
			<p>Fleurette promised that she would not be late. She picked up her beautiful new shawl and wrapped it round her shoulders. The château was not far; over by the mountain track, it was not more than a quarter of a league at most. Swiftly Fleurette ran out of the house and then along the edge of the stream⁠—the same way that the old faggot-carrier had gone an hour or so ago.</p>
			<p>And now the mantle of twilight was falling over the valley; the jade-coloured sky held myriads of tiny, fleecy clouds of a brilliant glowing crimson, which one by one faded into grey, alone the snow of Pelvoux reflected the glory of the sinking sun, and in the old walnut-tree the thrush’s song was stilled.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
